# Rentals
                           A look at price-demand sensitivity for apartment leases (A data challenge for a recent job interiew)
    An analytics firm has been asked by a real estate leasing company to look at the price-demand sensitivity of apartment rents.
    More specifically, can revenue (rents) be better optimized?  It is known that rents can be demand sensitive (as the stock of unleased units goes down, the rent quoted can go up.)
We are given about five years of leasing history (2012-2018), rent rates, leases, and 11 types of apartment plans - studio with loft, 2 BR, 1BR etc.  This was a data hacking challenge for a job interview.
    I had a difficult time coding a boolian 'occupied' or 'unoccupied' in R based solely on Start and End dates in the csv file.    As a first try, I recoded the Julian start and end dates ("01/01/2017") into time numeric periods (2017.01) and used Starts as a surrogate for demand.  
  Not certain how to proceed with expanding the Start and End into occupied time periods, I chose one year, and rebuilt the original data, converting Months field into factors for each month of the lease, per unit plan type.   With this, I looked the percent occupied (leased) vs. rent rates.   From the dataset, each of the 11 floor plans has 100 units in inventory. Inexplicably, the dataset shows an unusually low occupancy rate: across the 100 apartments, only 10-12 units are occupied at any given time.   - That is relevent, as we want to peg Rent Rates to the stock of available (vacant units).  Unfortunately, the data challenge does not explain this.
   Of the 11, I graphed Units Rented, then Rent dollars, vs Month time bucket for a full year.  See the charts below for Lease Starts vs. Rent Rates for given floor plans below.  Rental behavior does not vary, and shows a persistent 12 mo seasonality, with peak lease signings at August-Sept, and a trough in Jan-Feb of every year.  
   Demand patterns for Studio Lofts show a peak in Aug-September.  Our strategy should be to increase Rent rates for these units, and encourage occupancy of Studios with Master-Baths, which show a nice dip in August.  We should provide rent incentives to fill the Stdio-M&B units.   
    Larger units show a quite different demand pattern.  1 Bedrooms with a living room and bath, represented by '1 BR L&B' show lease signing increases in February and July.   December and January are very slow times.  We could improve occupancy and cashflow by New Years' incentives to start the calendar year.   Two bedrooms are a different matter.   They show a a small peak in January, with another in June.  Once again, winter months are slow, and we could offer some holiday inducements, sprucing up some show models with holiday decor and offering rent rebates as gifts to new rentors.
  The second graph shows a stacked bar chart of revenues (Rent $) broken down by unit floor plans, for one year.  It shows that March, June and July are our slowest cashflow months.   We need to provide incentives to our leasing agents during those months, and perhaps rent rebates.  Due to a data coding error, most of the NA under STD-S&B and STD-S&C are actually occuring in July-Sept of each year.
  I designed a machine-learning model in R and fed the long-term data into it.   It showed a 12 month seasonal pattern with no trend would fit future lease projections nicely.  However, the MAPE (mean percent error) of this model was quite high.
Early time periods, 2011-2102, show a distinctly different pattern than subsequent years.   Did something happen to the apartments (new units constructed after 2012)? Or had the interviewer placed garbage data into the early years to throw off my training model?   In any event, not knowing the situation, I chose to keep the anomalous data.    
  Our money-makers are the Studios, and the 1BR-L&A units.  
  Any strategy of increasing rents for the Studios needs to take into account rent adjustments by competitor apartments in the area.  But any strategy to reduce our seasonal lease add-drop cycle should smooth out our client's cashflow.  In addition, it looks like we are foregoing some revenue by not boosting rents for studios in Aug-Sept, or incentivising family move-ins for larger units during the Xmas and New Year's holidays.    The incredibly low occupancy rate (around 10-12%) was never explained by the data challenge or the interviewer, but would be a grave concern in real life.
   
